# 5. How to Plan for Opening Schools Safely and With Optimal Educational Support?

The following should be in place before a school can open safely:

## 5.1 A risk assessment

A risk assessment should be conducted at four levels including risk
assessment of the school, the staff, the pupil and the parents and
family environment. A risk assessment should follow **full engagement
with local authorities, school managers, trade unions, parents,
inspectors, staff and the community.** The assessment process needs to
be understood and tailored to the risks and contexts of communities and
their members and to the feasibility of schools to implement appropriate
infection control procedures. This includes the different risks from
lessons in different subjects (e.g. where there is sharing of equipment)
and the ability to socially distance within schools. Consideration
should be given to use of non-school facilities which may provide a
better infection control environment, such as independent school
buildings and playing fields, and sports facilities and football
stadiums, which will be unused during this time. Such engagement will
ensure an optimal solution to providing high quality education, social
interaction and physical activities to children. The ability to be
outside or in very well ventilated buildings or marquees will be
associated with reduced infection rates.

## 5.2 Are local infections low enough?

Local communities need to be sure that there are **few people currently
infected and that numbers of new infections are decreasing**, with the
definition of ‘few’ considered in the context of declines locally over
the previous 2 weeks and numbers at the peak of the pandemic. Such data
may not be available; data access and public availability is a critical
gap in the current management of the pandemic.  

## 5.3 Hygiene and personal protection

Schools need to ensure adequate access for hand hygiene including
sufficient and clean toilets and wash facilities and hand sanitisers. As
well as social distancing, some schools in countries such as France and
China are making the use of face coverings compulsory.

Children should be given designated equipment including stationary to
reduce the risk of contagion spread.

## 5.4 Find cases, test, trace, isolate.

A **test, trace, isolate (TTI) infrastructure** can rapidly suppress
transmission, as well as provide confidence to staff, pupils, families
and the local community that there will not be new uncontrolled local
outbreaks. In the absence of a top-down, well-functioning system, which
is not expected to be in place in the very near future, we recommend
**local solutions to TTI, linked to local public health authorities and
primary care, but with systems in place to allow as near as possible to
for local data to contribute to national data collection**. This could
involve wider testing of staff and pupils in schools to quickly identify
asymptomatic infections, within an ethical, appropriate and agreed
structure.
