# 4. Infection Control in Schools and Communities

## 4.1 Schools

A wide range of infection control measures have been implemented as
schools have reopened around the world. These range from staggering
opening by year groups, smaller class sizes, outdoor teaching and
variable start times through to personal protection, physical
distancing, and regular handwashing including, of course, for teachers
and other staff at school.

However, the crucial factor allowing school reopening around the world
has been the presence of well-functioning local test, trace and isolate
protocols—something that is now accepted will not be in place in England
by early June. Each school will vary in terms of layout, ventilation,
and numbers of available staff which will determine precisely which
infection control procedures are feasible or not. We note that school
opening in other countries, such as Denmark, has been preceded by
substantial investment in measures such as additional washing facilities
to promote safety.

Key measures need to be in place to ensure safety, and each school needs
to consult widely with teachers, unions, parents, local authorities
including public health for local intelligence on infectivity, education
departments and inspectors and children before proposing how best to
open the school to the proposed additional full classes.

## 4.2 Community

We recognise that schools will start to open while social distancing
guidance remains in place. Issues which require clear guidance include
transportation to school, collection of children at the school gates,
often by childminders, grandparents, and other carers, and how staff and
children can best minimise potential transmission of infection in
households and communities. Consideration will need to be given to
family members being from vulnerable groups and being shielded and for
multigenerational family households. Schools need to work with the local
communities to develop specific protocols suited to the local
environment (for instance, a village school faces different challenges
than an inner city one). Dealing with children’s anxiety about social
distancing also requires careful consideration.
