# 2. Transmission Risk

## 2.1 School opening

We believe that decisions on school opening should be guided by
**evidence of low levels of COVID-19 infections in the community and**
the ability to rapidly respond to new infections through **a local test,
track and isolate strategy. There is no clear evidence that these
conditions are met. Until they are it is not safe to open schools on
June 1.** Some rural areas might be ready to re-open schools earlier
than other places. Estimates of levels of infections must be based on
up-to-date real time, detailed, local data on suspected and confirmed
cases. To ensure that any local outbreaks are quickly spotted and
contained, **we strongly recommend that local test, track and isolate
programmes are in place and tested before schools re-open.** In cases
where schools reopen where these safeguards are not in place, we suggest
alternative testing strategies at the end of this document.

## 2.2 Are children less likely to be infected than adults?

Studies have shown that between 1% and 5% of diagnosed COVID-19 cases
are children, but many children may be undiagnosed because up to a third
of infected children never develop any symptoms. [Ongoing UK
data](https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/england21may2020 "https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/england21may2020")
suggest that children are in fact as likely as adults to become infected
and carry the virus. They may be less likely than adults to transmit the
virus because, for instance, adults are contagious for longer than
children. However, the

impact of placing many children in one place could lead schools to
become “institutional amplifiers”, if asymptomatic children go unnoticed
until an adult becomes symptomatic.

## 2.3 How sick do children get?

If children get symptoms, these are typically similar to other
respiratory illnesses: mild fever, cough, sore throat, sneezing, muscle
pain and tiredness. There is scientific consensus that children
generally have much milder disease than adults, with a very small number
of infected children becoming seriously ill. Concern has been raised
that some children might develop a COVID-19 related Kawasaki-type
immunological disease that may require critical care, but indications so
far are that this is extremely rare.

## 2.4 Can schools trigger new outbreaks?

It is difficult to assess the true risk of infected children transmitting the virus to other children and adults at school. Where that re-opening schools could increase the spread of the virus, both in the school and the wider community, perhaps by up to 0.3 on R value. Other evidence from Asia however suggests that school closures have little impact on the rate of transmission. There have been recent reports of an upsurge of cases following reopening of schools in France, South Korea and Denmark, leading to re-closing in some instances. However, this does not necessarily infer transmission within schools but could also be because infections are generally going up in places where lockdowns are eased.

## 2.5 How much difference does delaying school re-opening make to the chance of a child getting sick?

We have used advanced mathematical techniques to estimate how likely
children are to get sick depending on when their school reopens. The
**table** below shows the example impact that sending a child to school
has on their chance of getting sick with COVID-19, if they went back to
a classroom of 15 pupils on June 1st, June 15th, and September 1st. We
look at the chances of a child being exposed to an infectious person,
the chances of getting sick and the chance of dying from the virus.

These estimates come from mathematical models of the spread of COVID-19
in the UK, based on the most recent national-level data available, and
are for young primary school aged children (less than 10 years old). We
look at what might happen if a child goes to school (in bold), or stays
at home (in italics).

All risks to children are very low and all risks get lower over time as
COVID-19 cases become less common (assuming the virus “reproductive
number” R remains below 1).

**Delaying a school re-opening by two weeks (to 15th June) approximately
halves the risk to children**, and delaying the re-opening till
September is less risky still.

Staying at home at all time points is about half as risky as going to
school, but also means that children do not get the benefit of having
face-to-face learning and seeing their friends.

To put the very low chances of death from COVID-19 in perspective, the
daily chance of being killed in a road traffic accident is about 0.074
per million **(0.07/M)**. So, schools reopening in September present a
slightly lower risk and reopening in June a slightly higher risk to a
child than the background risk of a road traffic accident. Details of
the uncertainty levels are given in the Appendix.

![](46400e31-8485-4559-9a0d-81803fda39e2.png)

<!--    

<table data-width="100" data-aligned="center" data-layout="fixed" class="table-100 table-center table-fixed"><tbody><tr><td><p><em><strong>DATE OF RETURN</strong></em></p></td><td colspan="2"><p><em><strong> JUN 1 </strong></em></p></td><td colspan="2"><p><em><strong>JUN 15</strong></em></p></td><td colspan="2"><p><em><strong>SEP 1</strong></em></p></td></tr><tr><th><p><em><strong> </strong></em><br></p></th><th><p><em><strong>School</strong></em></p></th><th><p><em>home</em></p></th><th><p><em><strong>school</strong></em></p></th><th><p><em>home</em></p></th><th><p><em><strong>school</strong></em></p></th><th><p><em>home</em></p></th></tr><tr><td><p><em><strong>WHAT IS THE CHANCE A CHILD WILL BE EXPOSED TO A CONTAGIOUS CLASSMATE TODAY?</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>4.21%</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>1.76%</em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>2.09%</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.87%</em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>0.49%</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.19%</em></p></td></tr><tr><td><p><em><strong>WHAT IS THE CHANCE A CHILD WILL CATCH THE VIRUS TODAY?</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>1.46%</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.61%</em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>0.72%</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.30%</em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>0.15%</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.06%</em></p></td></tr><tr><td><p><em><strong>WHAT IS A CHANCE A CHILD WILL DIE FROM THAT INFECTION? (per<br>million)</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>0.23/M</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.10/M</em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>0.11/M</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.05/M</em></p></td><td><p><em><strong>0.02/M</strong></em></p></td><td><p><em>0.01/M</em></p></td></tr></tbody></table>

-->

The risks can be visualised in another way:

1\. Going to school

-----

![](46bf2518-19bf-4837-b334-601f0c61a11d.png)

2\. Staying at home

-----

![](887985ac-c6e1-4e75-9108-dd24b5bcc0cc.png)

The main takeaway from this kind of mathematics is that **risk falls
relatively quickly over a week or two** after commitment to a June 1
reopening date. This means that **delaying re-opening by a couple of
weeks could allow time to find solutions to local challenges and set up
strong local testing procedures while knowing that risks are getting
lower**.

## 2.6 What happens if a school has new cases of COVID-19?

Robust testing and tracing procedures along with support for people and
families to self-isolate will reduce the chance of infectious staff,
parents or children attending school (or anywhere else). They will also
quickly spot any new cases of infection that do arise in a school. So if
a class or school then has to close temporarily after reopening, this
should not then be seen as a failure — or evidence that opening was
premature — but instead as an integral part of a community-based
tracking and testing programme that will play an essential role in
delaying, and hopefully preventing, any second wave of infection. In
other words, the school community may have a central role to play in not
only meeting the educational and other needs of children but also **in
providing an effective surveillance structure** that may be essential in
keeping local communities safe.

We need a capability for a **real time response to TTI data**, with
clear criteria to act and plans in place to re-close schools if need be.
This should not be seen as a failure or a cause for blame. It’s
inevitable in a pandemic that new outbreaks will occur. Planning for
such re-closure is essential and must include measures to maintain
educational opportunities for pupils.

## 2.7. What is the risk to school staff, parents and household contacts?

Even if there are very few new infections within schools, this could
still be risky for some adults who come into contact with infected
children. This might include teachers and other school staff, household
members, childminders, and any other adults the child may have contact
with. Most younger teachers who are healthy are unlikely to get more
than a mild disease. But we know that factors such as age, being a man,
coming from a low income background, underlying health conditions (e.g.
diabetes, high blood pressure) and being from black and minority ethnic
(BAME) backgrounds may make teachers and staff more vulnerable, in
particular in cities with high BAME populations.The risks for those most
vulnerable and those shielding are very much higher than an adult
without any risk factors.

Many schools with BAME children are based in more deprived areas where
the risks will be greater and cumulative. We are well aware of robust
evidence (including recent findings from the ONS) which shows that
people from deprived areas, as well as particular BME groups (including
Bangladeshi, Pakistani and black groups) are significantly more likely
to die from COVID-19 than their more advantaged or white British
counterparts. Additionally, many key workers are also from lower income
and BAME backgrounds enhancing their risk of vulnerability and risk of
infection. Since many children (e.g. approx. 30% primary school and 25%
of secondary school children are from BME backgrounds), teachers and
other school staff are from black and ethnic minority communities, **it
is important to consider the locality-based COVID 19 infection and death
rates as the best indicator of the risk from any future school-based
outbreaks.** We plan to have modelled these effects before we release
our full report next week.
