# 1. Introduction

UK Cabinet Office Minister Michael Gove has re-asserted the Government’s
position that [schools&nbsp;should&nbsp;reopen](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/closure-of-educational-settings-information-for-parents-and-carers/reopening-schools-and-other-educational-settings-from-1-june)
from 1st June if certain conditions are met. But this has provoked a
mixed response with considerable questions being raised by parents,
headteachers, teaching unions, local authorities and health
professionals. Many Local Authorities have come forward saying they are
not ready, and the British Medical Association and teachers’ unions are
urging caution.

While there is no dispute that schools play a fundamental role in the
development of children’s emotional, social and intellectual
development, it is also important to remember that schools are embedded
within communities. The issue of schools reopening during COVID-19 does
not just have implications for pupils; it also has knock-on effects for
adult staff, parents and the communities and locality from which pupils
come from.

That said we recognise the issues facing decision-makers are complex,
with the task of balancing numerous, different and sometimes conflicting
needs of children, parents, and teaching and school support staff. We
understand that there is an imperative for children to return to school
for their own wellbeing, and that this will also enable *some* parents
to return to work (others will clearly have to remain at home if there
is no provision for the children to go to school), but it is also vital
that an appropriate level of safety for children, staff and the wider
community is ensured.

Using the frameworks of the recently published [guidance from
UNESCO](https://en.unesco.org/news/new-guidelines-provide-roadmap-safe-reopening-schools)
(new guidelines to provide a road map for safe reopening of schools) and
[WHO guidance for
schools](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/guidance-for-schools-workplaces-institutions),
we have considered (and are continuing to consider) the impact of school
opening on children, staff, and the wider community - including parents,
grandparents and guardians. Schools do not operate in a social vacuum,
and what happens in schools will have wide ramifications for everyone
within and outside of schools. It is for this reason that our approach
and analysis in this report about whether schools should reopen on 1
June 2020, has to a great extent been led by questions and concerns sent
to us by parents, teachers, inspectors, health professionals and
ordinary members of the public about the important issue of schools
reopening in a few weeks. We were taken aback by the level of knowledge
and understanding among ordinary members of the public about the
prevalence and transmission rates of COVID-19 in their local
communities, and among children and adults, but at the same time it was
apparent that the public did not feel that they had sufficient
scientific, social, and educational information from the government
about the impact of schools reopening on their children, teachers and
the wider community.

Questions and concerns from the public varied from whether it was safe
to re-open schools, what criteria needed to be in place for schools to
reopen, whether schools reopening for some children would sufficiently
address concerns about educational gaps and children’s welfare, and the
implications of schools opening on local communities, extended families
and vulnerable children and adults. We were particularly struck by fears
about the impact of coronavirus on children and extended members of
households among black and ethnic minority parents who were acutely
aware of the disproportionate hospital illness and deaths with COVID-19
among particular BME communities.

Schools represent a major axis of local communities. In the same way
that school closures were highly disruptive, then school opening, and
the manner in which this is done, will also be disruptive. A staggered
school opening based on year groups has major implications for
childminders, parents and guardians who may have responsibilities for
siblings of different ages. The risk of top down decision-making without
community involvement will mean that the burden will fall on individuals
to find a way to make this work. We strongly recommend that decisions on
school opening be made at local level, involving all stakeholders, to
ensure there is support available as schools progress to full function.

We make recommendations based on existing evidence and new modelling,
recognising the lack of evidence for many issues, and in such cases
identifying options which are likely to minimise risk. We are sharing
this document for public consultation via an online meeting on Friday
May 22 from 12.00 to 1.30pm.

Over the next week we will take on board further public concerns,
consult with other experts on education and public health, and review
any new evidence from other countries alongside latest data from the UK
to update and refine the recommendations in this brief report.
