# Appendix

## 1\. National Education Union Criteria for Schools Re-opening

Test 1 : **Much lower numbers of Covid-19 cases** The new case count
must be much lower than it is now, with a sustained downward trend and
confidence that new cases are known and counted promptly. And the
Government must have extensive arrangements for testing and contact
tracing to keep it that way.

Test 2 : **A national plan for social distancing** The Government must
have a national plan including parameters for both appropriate physical
distancing and levels of social mixing in schools, as well as for
appropriate PPE, which will be locally negotiated at school-by-school
and local authority level.

Test 3 : **Testing, testing, testing\!** Comprehensive access to regular
testing for children and staff to ensure our schools and colleges don’t
become hot spots for Covid-19.

Test 4 : **Whole school strategy** Protocols to be put in place to test
a whole school or college when a case occurs and for isolation to be
strictly followed.

Test 5 : **Protection for the vulnerable.** Vulnerable staff, and staff
who live with vulnerable people, must work from home, fulfilling their
professional duties to the extent that is possible. Plans must
specifically address the protection of vulnerable parents, grandparents
and carers.

## 2\. Uncertainty levels for the risk of contagion

The following graphic illustrates the uncertainty that attends the
predictions of risk (here, the risk of contagion). This is probably too
much detail for the consultation document but could be used to reassure
people that a formal risk analysis could be pursued if and when
necessary. The graph below shows when we would expect the risk of
contagion to fall below 1% (broken line) based upon UK averages. This
analysis could be repeated for regional data (e.g., time series of new
cases and deaths).

![](ed2c3f8e-80b3-4a5c-8af3-7f0aaede1a0d.png)

From the point of view of the epidemiology, June 1 stands in for 52 days
following the peak of infections (10 April for London). This means ‘June 1’ is the earliest date at which risk may be acceptable for some areas.
**Other areas could defer their ‘June 1st’ in relation to their local
experience**.

## 3\. WHO Checklists

![](1926f32d-5209-4d0f-9fa1-72a4513b5e19.png)

![](ab2e38c8-701a-4178-bbbf-2bf6f4f86691.png)
