# 3. Education Risk

## 3.1 Schools in deprived areas

The Children’s Commissioner calls for attention to the wider social and
economic costs of keeping schools closed and encourages intelligent,
incremental reopening of schools, particularly nurseries and primary
schools, responsive to local contexts and informed by rigorous testing
and comprehensive data.

Whilst there is little real-world data on the educational impact of
school closures, we know that teachers in the most deprived schools are
**more than twice as likely** to say that the work their students are
sending in is of a much lower quality than normal (15% vs 6%). In the
most deprived schools, 15% of teachers report that more than a third of
their students learning from home would not have adequate access to an
electronic device for learning, compared to only 2% in the most affluent
state schools. **12% of those in the most deprived schools also felt
that more than a third of their students would not have adequate
internet access.**

A [recent report from the Institute of Fiscal
Studies](https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14848 "https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14848")
also highlighted the disproportionate impact on deprived areas.
Higher-income parents are much more likely than the less well-off to
report that their child’s school provides online classes and access to
online videoconferencing with teachers. 82% of secondary independent
school pupils are offered active help, with 79% being provided with
online classes. 64% of secondary pupils in state schools from the
richest households are being offered active help from schools, such as
online teaching, compared with just 47% from the poorest fifth of
families.

**Moreover 60% of independent schools and 37% of schools in the highest
income areas had an online platform to receive work, compared to 23% in
the most deprived schools**. 45% of students had communicated with their
teachers in the last week. At independent schools, the figure is 62% for
primaries and 81% for secondaries.

The decision of many independent schools to open in September
demonstrates their ability to prioritise infection prevention, but only
in the context of ongoing high quality on-line educational opportunities
for their pupils.

## 3.2 Access to facilities

It is clear that existing stark inequalities in educational
opportunities for children are being further widened through the
COVID-19 pandemic, in parallel with the clear excess disease burden in
the most disadvantaged adults - many of whom are parents and
grandparents.The impact goes further than academic progress, including
the psychological effects of isolation and increased vulnerability to
some children when they are never seen by adults outside their own
household.

Returning to school is important for children psychologically and
socially, as well as educationally and we should aim to support all year
groups to return to school safely. In vulnerable households or where
there is a history of domestic abuse it is even more important.

We therefore raise the possibility of using a wide range of empty
facilities - private schools, sports facilities as examples - to allow
those most in need of face-to-face education and social support to
receive it, not only during the summer school term but also over summer
holidays. This could be in the form of summer camps where social and
physical development would be supported, with some education where
possible.
